Testing docs (#141)
apple/swift-temporal-sdk: Sources/Temporal/Documentation.docc/Testing/Testing-Workflows.md

# Testing workflows

Run workflows against a local test server, and catch non-deterministic code
changes with replay tests before they reach production.

## Overview

Temporal workflows are deterministic and replay-safe, so the same input
history produces the same result. This property makes workflows especially
testable, but it also means that innocent-looking code changes can break
replay in production.

This article shows you how to run workflows against a local test server,
test signals, queries, and updates, skip time for long-running workflows,
and verify that code changes stay deterministic with replay testing. You can

> test workflows in two ways:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This article shows you how to run workflows against a local test server,
test signals, queries, and updates; skip time for long-running workflows;
and verify that code changes stay deterministic with replay testing. You can
test workflows in two ways:
```

Complex sentence where the commas confuse the boundaries a bit - better with semicolons (or you could break it up into multiple sentences, but this keeps it compact)

Author: Nice catch with the semicolons, fixed. 👍

1. **Integration tests** with `TemporalTestServer` that run workflows against
   a local Temporal server.
2. **Replay tests** with ``WorkflowReplayer`` that verify workflow code changes
   are compatible with recorded execution histories.

> ### Integration test a workflow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Integration testing a workflow
```

gerund style

struct GreetingWorkflowTests {
    @Test
    func greetingReturnsHello() async throws {
        let testServer = TemporalTestServer.testServer!
        let taskQueue = "test-\(UUID())"
        let logger = Logger(label: "test")

        let config = TemporalWorker.Configuration(
            namespace: "default",
            taskQueue: taskQueue,
            instrumentation: .init(serverHostname: "localhost")
        )

        try await testServer.withConnectedWorker(
            configuration: config,
            activities: GreetingActivities().allActivities,
            workflows: [GreetingWorkflow.self]
        ) { _ in
            try await testServer.withConnectedClient(
                logger: logger
            ) { client in
                let handle = try await client.startWorkflow(
                    type: GreetingWorkflow.self,
                    options: .init(
                        id: "wf-\(UUID())",
                        taskQueue: taskQueue
                    ),
                    input: "World"
                )
                let result = try await handle.result()
                #expect(result == "Hello, World!")
            }
        }
    }
}
```

> The test trait starts the server before tests run and shuts it down after.

Reviewer: This is listed as an `> Important` aside in the previous article - but it's plain prose here. We should be be consistent (or just consolidate the two) - either plain prose describing what it does or `> Important` is that's a critical call out to make sure the developer is aware of it.

Author: I made this consistent by using the Important callout in both files, thanks!

> ### Test signals, queries, and updates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Testing signals, queries, and updates
```

gerund style

Send signals, run queries, and execute updates on a running workflow to verify
handler behavior. For how to define these handlers, see
<doc:Developing-Workflows>.

> Given a workflow with signal, query, and update handlers:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following workflow defines signal, query, and update handlers:
```

More direct & descriptive, rather than leading with "Given... " which tends to be more academic style

```swift
@Workflow
struct CounterWorkflow {
    private var count = 0

    mutating func run(
        context: WorkflowContext<Self>,
        input: Void
    ) async throws -> Int {
        try await context.condition { $0.count >= 3 }
        return count
    }

    @WorkflowSignal
    mutating func increment(input: Void) {
        count += 1
    }

    @WorkflowQuery
    func currentCount(input: Void) -> Int {
        count
    }

    @WorkflowUpdate
    mutating func setCount(input: Int) -> Int {
        count = input
        return count
    }
}
```

Test each handler type through the workflow handle. The worker and client

> setup is the same as the integration test above; inside the client closure:

Reviewer: I'm missing how "inside the closure" fits and what it's referring to in this context. It seems to be referring to the code below, but I wasn't sure.

Author: Reworded this, hopefully now it reads better :)

```swift
let handle = try await client.startWorkflow(
    type: CounterWorkflow.self,
    options: .init(id: "wf-\(UUID())", taskQueue: taskQueue)
)

try await handle.signal(signalType: CounterWorkflow.Increment.self)
try await handle.signal(signalType: CounterWorkflow.Increment.self)

let count = try await handle.query(
    queryType: CounterWorkflow.CurrentCount.self
)
#expect(count == 2)

// Set the counter directly via an update
let updated = try await handle.executeUpdate(
    updateType: CounterWorkflow.SetCount.self,
    input: 10
)
#expect(updated == 10)

let result = try await handle.result()
#expect(result == 10)
```

> ### Test time-dependent workflows

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Testing time-dependent workflows
```

gerund style

        let config = TemporalWorker.Configuration(
            namespace: "default",
            taskQueue: taskQueue,
            instrumentation: .init(serverHostname: "localhost")
        )

        try await testServer.withConnectedWorker(
            configuration: config,
            workflows: [DelayedGreetingWorkflow.self]
        ) { _ in
            try await testServer.withConnectedClient(
                logger: logger
            ) { client in
                let start = ContinuousClock.now
                let handle = try await client.startWorkflow(
                    type: DelayedGreetingWorkflow.self,
                    options: .init(
                        id: "wf-\(UUID())",
                        taskQueue: taskQueue
                    ),
                    input: "World"
                )
                let result = try await handle.result()
                #expect(result == "Hello, World!")

                let elapsed = ContinuousClock.now - start
                #expect(elapsed < .seconds(30))
            }
        }
    }
}
```

> Tip: `TemporalTestServer.withConnectedClient` installs the
> time-skipping interceptor for you.

> ### Replay test with WorkflowReplayer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Replay testing with WorkflowReplayer
```

gerund style

``WorkflowReplayer`` replays a workflow against a recorded history, so you
can verify that code changes stay deterministic.

> Important: A workflow must produce the same sequence of commands when replayed
> against its recorded history. Adding, removing, or reordering activities,
> timers, or child workflows breaks replay.

> > Tip: Common causes of replay failure include:

Reviewer: structurally, it's better to not have back-to-back callouts/aides. Can the one providing the tip be presented as regular prose content? (keeping the important callout to stand out)?

Author: Moved the failure causes into prose, keeping only the Important callout as a callout, thanks!

        let logger = Logger(label: "test")

        let config = TemporalWorker.Configuration(
            namespace: "default",
            taskQueue: taskQueue,
            instrumentation: .init(serverHostname: "localhost")
        )

        try await testServer.withConnectedWorker(
            configuration: config,
            activities: GreetingActivities().allActivities,
            workflows: [GreetingWorkflow.self]
        ) { _ in
            try await testServer.withConnectedClient(
                logger: logger
            ) { client in
                let handle = try await client.startWorkflow(
                    type: GreetingWorkflow.self,
                    options: .init(
                        id: "wf-\(UUID())",
                        taskQueue: taskQueue
                    ),
                    input: "World"
                )
                let result = try await handle.result()
                #expect(result == "Hello, World!")
            }
        }
    }
}
```

The test trait starts the server before tests run and shuts it down after.

The worker/client setup above is the same in every integration test. Extract

> it into a helper so each test focuses on its own logic:

Reviewer 2: It feels odd that we document that users should copy such a helper. Maybe we should just provide it ourselves.

Author: Yeah, removed it. Happy to add a `withTestServer` helper to `TemporalTestKit` as a follow-up if no one's on it. :)

Author: Done [here](https://github.com/apple/swift-temporal-sdk/pull/144), let me know what you think.
